Our text today highlights the importance of consoling which basically conveys the idea
to soothe and courage uplift fortify.
It also encourages us to support the weak and the basic meaning of that expression support
the weak is to hold fast to, cleave to the person that's needing assistance.
By doing that, we are certainly imitating Jehovah, aren't we?
At Psalm 34, 18, it says, Jehovah is close to the broken hearted, he's right there.
He saves those who are crushed in spirit.
He lifts up those who are depressed.
Well what can help us to imitate Jehovah to the best of our ability and consoling, supporting,
and doing all that with patience?
Well one thing that will certainly help is the relationship between the one giving the
assistance and the one receiving it.
If there's friendship there, it makes a big difference.
Because the one receiving the help feels comfortable, they may have something very embarrassing
or sensitive to talk about, and doing so with a true trusted friend makes it a lot easier.
And the one rendering the assistance, if he's a friend, then it doesn't come across like
he's interrogating or he's investigating something, but rather he's showing genuine interest.
Well building up an understanding of the background of each other certainly helps, doesn't it?
That's what friends do.
We understand a lot about that person, don't we?
For example, what could build up our desire to be consoling, to be supportive, and to do
it with patience?
With the background, here are just a few examples of background that can motivate us to do just
what our text says today.
Here they are.
Did they grow up in a dysfunctional family?
Was one of their parents an alcoholic?
Did the mother or father abandon them when they were young?
Did a beloved family member turn against the truth and is now a bitter opposer?
There could be many other reasons.
But such background gives us not only the desire to help with the willingness and the ability
to do it in a way that will be most helpful.
Now one thing we have to keep in mind about the variety of things that require assistance
is based on something that said in Romans chapter 8 and verse 22, and we invite you to
open your Bibles there.
Romans chapter 8 and verse 22, and this will help us to appreciate that regardless of the
problem, there is a common reason for it.
Romans 8, 22 Paul is talking about the bad effects that have come from the Adam's sin, and
here's what he says.
For we know that all creation keeps on groaning together and being in pain together
until now.
That pain and groaning as descendants of Adam's can manifest itself in physical ailments,
like heart trouble, diabetes, cancer or others.
But it's not limited to physical ailment.
Emotional and mental issues also arise because of being descendants of Adam.
And so just as we had never looked down or condemned someone who had a physical ailment,
we would never want to do that with some time that's going through an emotional issue,
such as depression or another mental illness.
And one of the things that we want to do for those regardless of what their needs may
be is to use the scriptures and to be a good shepherd.
Consistors can help other sisters, friends can help friends, elders of course have that
responsibility to help everyone too.
But now there's something that we need to keep in mind when we're trying to help.
And it's recorded for us in Proverbs chapter 12 and verse 18.
And we invite you to turn there, Proverbs 12, 18.
We want to help, we want to console, we do not want to hurt.
Proverbs 12, 18.
Notless speech is like the stabs of a sword, but the tongue of the wise is a healing.
So our desire is to console, to support, to uplift, to cheer up, not to make them
at or worse.
So thoughtful speech is a key.
Now just illustrate how much pain can be caused if that's not done.
Notice the expressions of one of our Christian sisters who went through a period of depression.
She said this.
One lesson I'll never forget.
I learned empathy.
Before I used to think that all you had to do was to pump yourself up and get going.
So I never had much fellow feeling for others who were sick.
Now I know.
And some of the friends told me to snap out of it.
There wasn't anything that I wanted to do more.
But at that point, I had no control.
Their comments really hurt.
Well, how sad, in an effort to help, we unintentionally can inflict more pain by thoughtless speech.
What can help us to prevent thoughtless speech?
Now we can consider these questions based on Bible principles.
Is what I'm about to say true, kind, necessary?
How would I feel if someone said that to me?
Will it show respect?
Is this the right setting to even bring it up at all?
Thinking before we speak can do a lot to do healing rather than to inflict more pain.
And in this connection in helping to press ones, patience is required.
Perhaps you've experienced this.
Someone that's suppressed may pour out their feelings with great feeling and intensity.
We listen.
We offer encouragement.
And then a short time later, they're back with the same intense feelings and concerns
as if it had never been discussed before.
This is required to keep consoling and to keep supporting.
In doing so, we would imitate Jehovah at Limitations 3, 22 and 23.
The Bible says about Jehovah.
It is because of Jehovah's loyal love that we have not come to our finish.
For his mercies never end.
They are new each morning.
Your faithfulness is abundant.
Jehovah gives us help every day.
And though it's not easy, we want to be just as patient and just as consoling and just
as helpful as Jehovah.
Well after listening and offering thoughtful, scriptural advice, the scriptures are powerful,
but sometimes something more than that is needed for someone who's depressed.
Why do we say that?
Luke 531, Jesus said this, those who are healthy do not need a physician, but those who
are ill do.
Depression may not be because of some temporary disappointment or a temporary feeling of
low or discouragement.
It might be more clinical.
It might have been inherited as part of a family trait or weakness.
And scriptures alone, although very valuable, will not be all the help they need.
In some cases, seeking medical attention is the course of wisdom and perhaps in some
cases even medication.
Well, if a person is in that situation, what should they do?
They've been helped, but they're still needing more help.
Well, with humility and modesty, recognizing their limitations, they will seek the help
they need, not only spiritually, but medically.
Well there's one thing about it, living in these last days, all of us are going to go periods
of time where we need encouragement.
In fact, we may be encouraging somebody today and next week we need it.
That's why the Apostle Paul and process only in chapter 5 and verse 11 said, keep encouraging
one another and building one another up just as in fact you are doing.
And if we do that, then we can help each of us endure through these last days to the
point where, as far told by Isaiah, no one will say I'm sick, either spiritually, mentally,
emotionally or physically.
So in line with today's text, let us keep what we're doing, speak consolingly to those
who are depressed, support the week, be patient toward all.